Gilbert Hill
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Gilbert Hill
Gilbert Hill.jpg
Gilbert Hill
Highest point
Elevation 	60 m (200 ft)
Coordinates 	19°07'15?N 72°50'24.24?ECoordinates: 19°07'15?N 72°50'24.24?E?
Geography
Gilbert Hill is located in Mumbai
Gilbert Hill
Gilbert Hill
Location of Gilbert Hill in Mumbai
Location 	India Andheri, Mumbai, India
Geology
Age of rock 	66 myr
Mountain type 	Volcanic
Volcanic arc/belt 	Deccan Trap
Climbing
Easiest route 	East (steps)

Gilbert Hill is a 200 ft (61 m) monolith column of black basalt rock at Andheri, in Mumbai, India. The rock has a sheer vertical face and was formed when molten lava was squeezed out of the Earth's clefts during the Mesozoic Era about 66 million years ago. During that era, molten lava had spread around most of the Indian states of Maharashtra, Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh, covering an area of 50,000 square kilometres (19,000 sq mi). The volcanic eruptions were also responsible for the destruction of plant and animal life during that era.[1]
Gilbert Hill, a monolith column of Black Basalt
Gilbert Hill, Andheri.jpg

According to experts, this rare geological phenomenon was the remnants of a ridge and had clusters of vertical columns in nearby Jogeshwari which were quarried off two decades ago. These vertical columns are similar to the Devils Tower National Monument in Wyoming, and the Devils Postpile National Monument in eastern California, USA.[2]

Gilbert Hill was declared a National Park in 1952 by the Central Government under the Forest Act. In 2007, after years of lobbying by geologists, the hill was declared a Grade II heritage structure by the Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai (MCGM), and all quarrying and other activities around the monument were prohibited.[2] Over the period of time, Gilbert Hill has faced severe erosion problems too.[3]

Atop the rock column, two Hindu temples, the Gaodevi and Durgamata temples, set in a small garden, are accessed by a steep staircase carved into the rock. The hill offers a panoramic view of suburban Mumbai.

Efforts are being made to convert Gilbert Hill into a tourist attraction and include it as stop on tour of Mumbai by Maharashtra Tourism Development Corporation.[4]
See also

    Devils Postpile National Monument
    Deccan Trap

References

Times of India (Bombay) article dated 16 December 2004.
Thomas, Shibu (2007-09-10). "Gilbert Hill to be Heritage Structure". Times of India, Mumbai. Bennett, Coleman & Co. Ltd. Retrieved 2008-05-02.
Singh, Vijay (2006-07-06). "Gilbert Hill is on shaky ground". The Times Of India. Retrieved 2006-07-06.

    Times of India - Efforts on to get Gilbert Hill on touristThis was full round hill at Andheri. It was known as Gaondevi's donger ?????????? ????? in my childhood. There is a temple of Gaondevi on the top. After independence quarrying, authorised or unautharised, started and the hill has been cut for stones from all sides. It was difficult to climb from north but some adventurous clmbed it through rocks. We climbed from south, which was strenuous but not difficult. It, the muddy road, should still be there to reach the temple. I am not sure. I visited Gamdevi temple several times either with family or friends. (1945-1962) Very little place around the temple. There was a pujari, who used to live there. Had he not objected in the name of Godess and temple and undertaken fast, the remaining hill also would have been demolished. Forget about heritage and environment. We sympathised with him but nobody seriously pursued any movement to preserve it. Now it is found to be one of the oldest rock. map

[hide]

    v t e 

Mumbai topics
History 	

    Timeline Silhara dynasty Bombay Presidency Seven Islands of Bombay Elephanta Caves Banganga Tank Old Bombay Worli Fort Girangaon Samyukta Maharashtra Movement Tanks Growth of Mumbai 1992–93 riots 1993 bombings 2008 attacks Terrorism 

Geography 	

    Powai Lake Vihar Lake Tulsi Lake Thane Creek Mahim Bay Back Bay Mithi River Ulhas River Gilbert Hill Malabar Hill Salsette Island Mumbai Harbour Middle Ground Climate Beaches Eastern Suburbs Western Suburbs South Mumbai Neighbourhoods 

Buildings 	

    Architecture of Mumbai Gateway of India Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus Naval Dockyard Bombay Stock Exchange Hutatma Chowk General Post Office Shreepati Arcade Regal Cinema Mount Mary's Church Haji Ali Dargah Flora Fountain David Sassoon Library Mumba Devi Temple Mahalaxmi Temple Prince of Wales Museum National Gallery of Modern Art Asiatic Society of Mumbai Jehangir Art Gallery Gowalia Tank Shri Swaminarayan Mandir Mahim Church 

Transport 	

    Brihanmumbai Electric Supply and Transport (BEST) Mumbai Suburban Railway Central Railway Western Railway Chhatrapati Shivaji International Airport Juhu Aerodrome Auto rickshaw Metro Monorail Skywalk Western railway elevated corridor Water transport Mumbai Bus Rapid Transit System Mumbai Urban Transport Project 

Roads 	

    Airoli Bridge Altamount Road Bandra–Worli Sea Link Carmichael Road Colaba Causeway Currey Road Bridge Dadabhai Naoroji Road Eastern Express Highway Eastern Freeway Fashion Street Hughes Road Jeejabai Bhosle Marg JVLR Linking Road Lady Jamshetjee Road LBS Marg Lamington Road Mahim Causeway Marine Drive MTHL Nepean Sea Road P D'Mello Road Pedder Road Princess Street SCLR SV Road Sahar Elevated Access Road Sion Panvel Highway Vashi Bridge Veera Desai Road Western Express Highway 

Economy 	

    Bombay Stock Exchange National Stock Exchange of India Reserve Bank of India Mint Dalal Street Nariman Point 

Education
and Research 	
Universities
& Colleges 	

    University of Mumbai (MU) SNDT Women's University Indian Institute of Technology - Bombay (IIT-B) Veermata Jijabai Technological Institute (VJTI) Mulund College of Commerce ICT (formerly UDCT) NITIE Jamnalal Bajaj Institute of Management Studies (JBIMS) SP Jain Institute of Management and Research NMIMS St. Xavier's College Sathaye College Ramnarain Ruia College DG Ruparel College Ramniranjan Anandilal Podar College of Commerce and Economics V. G. Vaze College of Arts, Science and Commerce 

Schools 	

    Bombay Scottish School Campion School Cathedral and John Connon School Dhirubhai Ambani International School Dr. Antonio Da Silva High School Jamnabai Narsee School Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan King George High School, Dadar(E) St. Theresa's Boys High School 

Institutes for Science
& Learning 	

    Tata Institute of Fundamental Research (TIFR) Bhabha Atomic Research Centre (BARC) Nehru Planetarium Nehru Science Centre Tata Institute of Social Sciences (TISS) Centre for Excellence in Basic Sciences (UM-DAE CBS) 

Civic 	

    Mayor Police Commissioner Municipal Commissioner Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation Mumbai Police Wards Brihanmumbai Electric Supply and Transport Demographics Water sources Bombay High Court Sheriff 

Culture 	

    Marathi Mumbaiya/Bombaiya/Bambaiya Dabbawalas Mumbaikar Street food Vada pav Bhelpuri Sevpuri Dahi puri Panipuri Ragda pattice Cultural centres Cinemas Kala Ghoda festival Mumbai Marathon Tourist attractions Little Bombay, Jersey City, USA 

Religion in Mumbai 	

    Jainism in Mumbai Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Bombay History of the Jews in Mumbai List of churches in Mumbai Anglican Diocese of Bombay Mumbai Orthodox Diocese 

Other topics 	

    Bombay High Kamathipura Dharavi People from Mumbai 

